tutorial: get started (#392)
piraeusdatastore/piraeus-operator: docs/tutorial/get-started.md

# Get Started

Learn about the ways to get started with Piraeus Datastore by deploying Piraeus Operator and provisioning your first volume.

## Prerequisites

* [Install `cert-manager`](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/). You can quickly install `cert-manager` by
  applying its static manifests:
  ```
  kubectl apply -f https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/releases/latest/download/cert-manager.yaml
  ```
* [Install the Linux kernel headers on the hosts](./install-kernel-headers.md).
* [Install `kubectl` version `>= 1.22`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)

## 1: Install Piraeus Operator

> In this tutorial we will be using `kubectl` the built-in `kustomize` feature to deploy Piraeus Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we will be using `kubectl` with the built-in `kustomize` feature to deploy Piraeus Operator.
```

All resources needed to run Piraeus Operator are included in a single Kustomization.

Install Piraeus Operator by running:

```bash

> $ kubectl apply --server-side -k "https://github.com/piraeusdatastore/piraeus-operator//config/default?ref=v2"

Reviewer: I get a 404. Don't we need some `/raw/` part in the URL?

Reviewer: :bulb:

namespace/piraeus-datastore configured
...
```

The Piraeus Operator will be installed in a new namespace `piraeus-datastore`. After a short wait the operator will be

> ready:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ready. The following command waits until the Operator is ready:
```

pod/linstor-controller-65cbbc74db-9vm9n condition met
pod/linstor-csi-controller-5ccb7d84cd-tvd9h condition met
pod/linstor-csi-node-2lkpd condition met
pod/linstor-csi-node-hbcvv condition met
pod/linstor-csi-node-hmrd7 condition met
pod/n1.example.com condition met
pod/n2.example.com condition met
pod/n3.example.com condition met
pod/piraeus-operator-controller-manager-dd898f48c-bhbtv condition met
```

We can now inspect the state of the deployed LINSTOR® Cluster using the `linstor` client:

```
$ kubectl -n piraeus-datastore exec deploy/linstor-controller -- linstor node list
+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Node           | NodeType  | Addresses                   | State  |
|===================================================================|
| n1.example.com | SATELLITE | 10.116.72.166:3366 (PLAIN)  | Online |
| n2.example.com | SATELLITE | 10.127.183.190:3366 (PLAIN) | Online |
| n3.example.com | SATELLITE | 10.125.97.33:3366 (PLAIN)   | Online |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

## 3: Configuring Storage

> We still have not configured any storage location for our volumes. This can be accomplished by creating a new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have not yet configured any storage location for our volumes. This can be accomplished by creating a new
```

`LinstorSatelliteConfiguration` resource. We will create a storage pool of type `fileThinPool` on each node.
We chose `fileThinPool` as it does not require further configuration on the host.

```
$ cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: piraeus.io/v1
kind: LinstorSatelliteConfiguration
metadata:
  name: storage-pool
spec:
  storagePools:
    - name: pool1
      fileThinPool:
        directory: /var/lib/piraeus-datastore/pool1
EOF
```

> This will cause some Pods to be recreated, afterwards the `linstor node list`, will temporarily show offline nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will cause some Pods to be recreated. While this occurs `linstor node list` will temporarily show offline nodes:
```

```
$ kubectl -n piraeus-datastore exec deploy/linstor-controller -- linstor node list
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Node           | NodeType  | Addresses                   | State   |
|====================================================================|
| n1.example.com | SATELLITE | 10.116.72.166:3366 (PLAIN)  | OFFLINE |
| n2.example.com | SATELLITE | 10.127.183.190:3366 (PLAIN) | OFFLINE |
| n3.example.com | SATELLITE | 10.125.97.33:3366 (PLAIN)   | OFFLINE |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

Waiting a bit longer, the nodes will be `Online` again. Once the nodes are connected again, we can verify that

> the storage pools where configured:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the storage pools were configured:
```

[`PersistentVolume`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) in Kubernetes.

First, we will set up a new [`StorageClass`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/) for our
volumes. In the `StorageClass`, we specify the storage pool from above:

```
$ cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: piraeus-storage
provisioner: linstor.csi.linbit.com
allowVolumeExpansion: true
volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
parameters:
  linstor.csi.linbit.com/storagePool: pool1
EOF
```

Next, we will create a [`PersistentVolumeClaim`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/),
requesting 1G of storage from our newly created `StorageClass`.

```
$ cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: data-volume
spec:
  storageClassName: piraeus-storage
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1G
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
EOF
```

When we check the created PersistentVolumeClaim, we can see that it remains in `Pending` state. We first need to create

> a "consumer", in this case is just a `Pod`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a "consumer", which in this case is just a `Pod`.
```

Maybe move this sentence below the `kubectl get persistentvolumeclaim`. That is connected more to the previous sentence.

# Get Started

Learn about the ways to get started with Piraeus Datastore by deploying Piraeus Operator and provisioning your first volume.

## Prerequisites

* [Install `cert-manager`](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/). You can quickly install `cert-manager` by
  applying its static manifests:
  ```
  kubectl apply -f https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/releases/latest/download/cert-manager.yaml
  ```

> * [Install `kernel-devel` or `linux-headers` on the host](#TODO)

Author: Literally `#TODO`

Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/drbd1000   921M   24K  857M   1% /usr/share/nginx/html
```

Taking a look with the `linstor` client, we can see that the volume data is replicated on three nodes.

```
$ kubectl -n piraeus-datastore exec deploy/linstor-controller -- linstor resource list-volumes
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Node           | Resource                                 | StoragePool | VolNr | MinorNr | DeviceName    | Allocated | InUse  |    State |
|===========================================================================================================================================|
| n1.example.com | pvc-9e1149e7-33db-47a7-8fc6-172514422143 | pool1       |     0 |    1000 | /dev/drbd1000 | 16.91 MiB | InUse  | UpToDate |
| n2.example.com | pvc-9e1149e7-33db-47a7-8fc6-172514422143 | pool1       |     0 |    1000 | /dev/drbd1000 |   832 KiB | Unused | UpToDate |
| n3.example.com | pvc-9e1149e7-33db-47a7-8fc6-172514422143 | pool1       |     0 |    1000 | /dev/drbd1000 |   832 KiB | Unused | UpToDate |

> +-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Author: Should I explain why the allocated size differs between node? I don't think so, but maybe people get worried?

Reviewer: I don't think it is necessary.

Author: Removed it entirely, as a user might not even have 3 nodes. Safer to assume a single node cluster. I guess we need to show replication in another tutorial
